gh-95271: Improve sqlite3 tutorial wording (#95749)
python/cpython: Doc/library/sqlite3.rst

Tutorial
--------

> To use the module, start by opening a connection to an SQLite database.

Reviewer: This seems to assume both that I already have a DB, and that I know how to connect to it (or even what "opening a connection" means).  It almost frames it more like an "how to connect to an existing DB" than as a tutorial.

I think it would be better to say something like "In this tutorial we will see how to create and connect to a simple DB on a file, add some items, etc." and assume that the user doesn't already have a DB.

Author: Yes, something like that will be an improvement; thanks.

We do this by using the :func:`sqlite3.connect` function.
The returned :class:`Connection` object represents our

> connection to the database.

Reviewer: This is still assuming that I already have a DB.  It addition, saying that the `Connection` object represents a connection is not particularly useful (why do I need a connection?).

You could say something like "In order to read from and write to the DB, we first need to establish a connection using the :func:`sqlite3.connect` function.  This will return a :class:`Connection` object."

In our example,
the database will be stored in the file :file:`example.db`::

   import sqlite3
   con = sqlite3.connect('example.db')

Notice that the file :file:`example.db` will be created implicitly

> if it does not exist.

Reviewer: Inexperienced users might be "scared" of creating an `example.db` without knowing where it will be created -- so telling them where it will be created helps[^1].  However this requires them to know what the cwd is (maybe a link to Wikipedia or to a glossary entry if it already exists will help).

It might also be worth mentioning explicitly that unlike other DB systems (e.g. MySQL, postgres), sqlite3 works with files.

Finally, regarding `:memory:` I think it might be worth mentioning it, e.g. "Sqlite3 can create DBs either on a file or in memory (if the `:memory:` string is passed instead of a filename).  For this tutorial we will use `example.db`, which will create the DB on a file in the current working directory."

[^1]: I'm assuming it's in the cwd.

Author: > It might also be worth mentioning explicitly that unlike other DB systems (e.g. MySQL, postgres), sqlite3 works with files.

This is already noted in the _Introduction_ section.

> Now, create a :class:`Cursor` object using :meth:`~Connection.cursor`.

Reviewer: What's a cursor? Why do I need it?
I would add a sentence or two to cover this.

Author: I'm not keen on drifting too far away from the core of the tutorial: learning the basic API of the sqlite3 module. Perhaps we can link to an external resource? If Sphinx lets us create tooltips, that might be an option.

Reviewer: As for the transaction below, I don't expect an indepth explanation.

I think the issue is mostly that the tutorial is telling me to do something (that I might not fully understand) with no justification of *why* we are doing it and what is it going to accomplish.

Even a simple sentence like "In order to execute SQL queries, we need to create a Cursor object using conn.cursor." would go a long way IMHO.

Reviewer 2: > I think the issue is mostly that the tutorial is telling me to do something (that I might not fully understand) with no justification of why we are doing it and what is it going to accomplish.

I agree with Ezio; it doesn't have to go into any detail, but we shouldn't simply tell users to create a cursor without any explanation of why we are doing so, otherwise newer users, whom a tutorial is inherently directed at, are simply carried along cargo-culting without actually _learning_, which is the objective of the tutorial.

> If Sphinx lets us create tooltips, that might be an option.

That's [`:abbr:`](https://www.sphinx-doc.org/en/master/usage/restructuredtext/roles.html#role-abbr), BTW

Reviewer 2: There's another significant, somewhat related issue here, IMO. We're just telling the user to perform arbitrary SQL queries, and then performing some in the example without any background, explanation or motivation for doing so that's tied to the goal of the tutorial. It would be nice to at least _briefly_ mention what we're doing here (presumably, creating a new table of stock transactions, and inserting a BUY of Red Hat into the table). Otherwise, just pasting in arbitrary SQL statements doesn't sound very engaging, given that was one of your goals with this change.

Author: Thanks, both; I'm convinced :) I'll revise it later today.

As for the SQL itself: I'll try to come up with a more concise example than the stocks thing. Preferrably some table with two, max three, rows. Maybe the old personnel database example, or even the music catalogue example should be used, as they will be familiar to folks who've done an SQL tutorial or two.

Reviewer: I would pick a topic that most people like and are familiar with.  Music would be a good choice IMHO, or perhaps animals, planets, programming languages.  I would create at least 3 rows/columns.

Author: I went for Python release management :) Release dates, etc. I can expand from two to three columns.

Reviewer 2: I never knew Python releases could be so fun; the release managers must be really lucky to have that job :laughing:

Author: Yeah... very fun 😆 Ok, ok, let's do planets instead. We'll let the first inserted row be Pluto; it'll be fun to watch the bug tickets: "Bug in sqlite3 tutorial: Pluto is not a planet"

Author: More seriously: maybe Python releases is not the best example :) I'm fine with anything. Perhaps the music catalogue is the way to go.

Reviewer 2: Well, it isn't...unless you're also inserting Eris, Vesta, etc.

Trust me, I'm a NASA<sub><sup>*-funded earth*</sup></sub> scientist

Author: Ok, both fun _and_ pythonic: a Monty Python film (or skit, or quotes) database.

Reviewer: Monty Python movies SGTM.  As columns you can have title, release date, and review score (you can pick imdb or rt scores, but you need to mention them).  Both the subject (movies) and the fields (title, date, score) are simple and familiar to people, it's pythonic, and as an added bonus it might make people curious about them.

Reviewer 2: SGTM too

Author: Updated. I think it worked well; I added three rows: title, year, and review score. I also added more verification steps, added a missing commit, and fixed up the output.

Call its :meth:`~Cursor.execute` method to perform SQL queries::

   cur = con.cursor()

   # Create table, then insert a row of data.
   cur.execute('''CREATE TABLE stocks
                  (date text, trans text, symbol text, qty real, price real)''')
   cur.execute("INSERT INTO stocks VALUES ('2006-01-05','BUY','RHAT',100,35.14)")

The ``INSERT`` statement will implicitly open a transaction.
See :ref:`sqlite3-controlling-transactions` for more details.

> Use the connection object to :meth:`~Connection.commit` the transaction::

Reviewer: What's a transaction?  Why do I have to commit it?
I know that you linked to another section, but at this point I will be happy with something like:
> The ``INSERT`` statement opens a transaction that needs to be committed before the changes are saved in the DB. We can do this with the :meth:`~Connection.commit`.  If you want to learn more about transactions, see :ref:`sqlite3-controlling-transactions`::

Author: Ditto; I believe we can assume basic knowledge of database concepts. Perhaps we should state that at the start of the tutorial?

Author: I added a sentence that resembles your suggestion :) Thanks!

   con.commit()  # Save the changes.

Verify that data has been committed and written to disk:
close the connection, open a new connection,

> then query the database::

Reviewer: Maybe you should mention the `cursor` too here.  In addition, you could say "then use a `SELECT` to read from the database", since "query the DB" is a bit generic.

      PEP written by Marc-André Lemburg.

.. We use the following practises for SQL code:

> .. - UPPERCASE for keywords
> .. - lowercase for schema
> .. - single quotes for string literals
> .. - singular for table names
> .. - if needed, use double quotes for table and column names

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
   - UPPERCASE for keywords
   - lowercase for schema
   - single quotes for string literals
   - singular for table names
   - if needed, use double quotes for table and column names
```

Minor nit and not necessarily worth changing for, but just FYI, you don't need `..`s on every line here; `.. ` starts a comment declaration block, so anything indented under it will be treated as a comment.

Author: > Minor nit and not necessarily worth changing for, but just FYI, you don't need `..`s on every line here; `.. ` starts a comment declaration block, so anything indented under it will be treated as a comment.

TIL!

.. _sqlite3-tutorial:

Tutorial
--------

In this tutorial, you will learn the basics of the :mod:`!sqlite3` API
by creating an on-disk database :file:`python.db`
for managing Python release metadata.
A fundamental understanding of database concepts,
like `transactions`_ and `cursors`_, is assumed.

To start working with an SQLite database,
you must first open a connection to it.
Call the :func:`sqlite3.connect` function

> to create a :class:`Connection` to the database :file:`python.db`::

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
to create a connection to the database :file:`python.db`::
```

My original suggestion made a mistake here, IMO—I think its better to use the prose word "connection" here, and then cross-reference the class in the line below where it is explicitly introduced and directly being referred to, rather than having two references a couple of lines apart, one where it isn't really directly called for.

Author: +1

   import sqlite3
   con = sqlite3.connect("python.db")

> SQLite will implicitly create the database file :file:`python.db`

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
SQLite will implicitly create an empty database file :file:`python.db`
```

Be a little more clear and explicit here about what gets created

in the current working directory if it does not exist.
The returned :class:`Connection` object ``con``

> represents our connection to the on-disk database.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
represents the connection to the on-disk database.
```

Avoid mixing first person plural with second person singular

In order to execute SQL statements and fetch results from SQL queries,

> we need to use a database cursor.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
use a database cursor.
```

Most of the tutorial uses second person singular but this uses first person plural, so we (heh) should be consistent here—this is probably my fault since I do this a lot myself. Also, this allows us to be more concise and direct here.

Author: Imperative mode, ftw.

Call the :meth:`~Connection.cursor` method of ``con`` to create
:class:`Cursor` ``cur``::

   cur = con.cursor()

> Now, let us create a database table ``release`` with columns for version

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Now, you want to create a database table ``release`` with columns for version
```

Not 100% sure about the wording, but like the other spots, it would be nice to be consistent about the perspective here

Author: Even better, just remove _"let us"_ ;)

> number and release date, and inserting the release data for Python 1.0.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
number and release date, and inserting the data for Python 3.0.
```

I assume this is a typo, since you have the data for Python 3.0 in the example below. Also, elide the repeated "release", which also avoids any confusion over "release date" / "release data"

Author: Yep, I switched the rows around at some point. Probably to make use of the sorting in the last query.

Execute the SQL statements
by calling the :meth:`~Cursor.execute` method of ``cur``::

   cur.execute("""CREATE TABLE release(version, releasedate)""")
   cur.execute("INSERT INTO release VALUES('3.0', '2008-12-03')")

> The ``INSERT`` statement implicitly opens a transaction
> that needs to be committed before changes are saved in the database

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The ``INSERT`` statement implicitly opens a transaction,
which needs to be committed before changes are saved in the database
```

Avoid rather long sentence with no pauses

(see :ref:`sqlite3-controlling-transactions` for details).

> Call the :meth:`~Connection.commit` on the connection object

Reviewer 2: Typo; this should be either

```suggestion
Call the :meth:`~Connection.commit` method on the connection object
```

or

```suggestion
Call :meth:`~Connection.commit` on the connection object
```

Author: I prefer the latter; it is concise. I'll make that change throughout the tutorial.

to commit the transaction::

   con.commit()

Verify that data has been committed and written to disk by
closing the connection and opening a new one,
creating a new cursor,
and then executing a ``SELECT`` query to read from the database::

   >>> con.close()
   >>> con2 = sqlite3.connect("python.db")
   >>> cur2 = con2.cursor()
   >>> res = cur2.execute("SELECT count(rowid) FROM release")
   >>> print(res.fetchone())
   (1,)

The result is a one-item :class:`tuple`:
one row, with one column.
Now, insert three more rows by calling
the :meth:`~Cursor.executemany` method on the cursor object::

   data = [
       ("2.0", "2000-10-16"),
       ("1.0", "1994-01-26"),
   ]
   cur2.executemany("INSERT INTO release VALUES(?, ?)", data)

> Notice that we use ``?`` placeholders to bind ``data`` to the query.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Notice that ``?`` placeholders are used to bind ``data`` to the query.
```

Consistent perspective

Always use placeholders instead of :ref:`string formatting <tut-formatting>`
to bind Python values to SQL statements,
to avoid `SQL injection attacks`_.
See :ref:`sqlite3-placeholders` for more details.

Now, retrieve the rows by iterating over the result of a ``SELECT`` query::

   >>> for row in cur2.execute("SELECT * FROM release ORDER BY version"):
   ...     print(row)

   ('1.0', '1994-01-26')
   ('2.0', '2000-10-16')
   ('3.0', '2008-12-03')

> Each row is a two-item :class:`!tuple`.
> You've now created an SQLite database using the :mod:`!sqlite3` module,

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Each row is a two-item :class:`!tuple`.

You've now created an SQLite database using the :mod:`!sqlite3` module,
```

Seems this paragraph break got lost.

      PEP written by Marc-André Lemburg.

.. We use the following practises for SQL code:
   - UPPERCASE for keywords
   - SnakeCase for schema
   - single quotes for string literals
   - singular for table names
   - if needed, use double quotes for table and column names

.. _sqlite3-tutorial:

Tutorial
--------

In this tutorial, you will learn the basics of the :mod:`!sqlite3` API
by creating an on-disk movie database :file:`tutorial.db`

> an filling it with meta-data about Monty Python movies.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
and filling it with meta-data about Monty Python movies.
```

"filling it with meta-data" seems unnecessary technical.  Maybe you simply say "by creating an on-disk database about Monty Python movies." instead.

Author: Agreed. Simple is nice.

> an filling it with meta-data about Monty Python movies.

Reviewer 2: Incorporating @ezio-melotti 's suggestion and comment from the above as well as a couple other fixes:

```suggestion
In this tutorial, you will learn the basics of the :mod:`!sqlite3` API
by creating an SQLite database of Monty Python movies.
```

Author: I think SQLite is implicit, since this is an `sqlite3` database API tutorial. I also think we still should mention that it is an on-disk database. See latest rev. and let me know what you think.

Reviewer 2: Makes sense to me :+1: I did have some other comments, though

A fundamental understanding of database concepts,

> like `transactions`_ and `cursors`_, is assumed.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
It assumes a fundamental understanding of database concepts,
including `transactions`_ and `cursors`_.
```

Avoid passive voice and structure this more simply and concisely

Reviewer: I prefer the original version here :thinking:

Author: Well, I've rewritten this in newest revision (soon to be pushed) anyway 😉

Author: Nah, I ditched my rewrite. Going for a variant CAM's suggestions, as I slightly prefer the flow of that over the current.

To start working with an SQLite database,

> you must first open a connection to it.

Reviewer 2: What about this for implementing @ezio-melotti 's suggestion?

```suggestion
First, you need to create a new database to hold the movie data,
and open a connection to allow mod:`!sqlite3` to work with it.
```

Call the :func:`sqlite3.connect` function

> to create a connection to the database :file:`tutorial.db`::

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
to create a connection to a database :file:`tutorial.db`,
creating it if it doesn't exist::
```

Avoid implying (with the definite article) that this already exists, and explicitly mention the behavior here instead of a whole separate sentence after, following @ezio-melotti 's suggestions

Author: Is it not better to mention the specific database file instead of a generic database file?

Author: I moved the implicit creation subsentence here, as suggested, though.

Reviewer 2: It sounded a little strange to me to refer to a new database that may or may not exist with a definite article, as if were already a specific thing (when in fact that's unknowable at that point), but I'm not 100% sure.

Author: I changed by mind; it does sound slightly better with `a` contra `the`.

   import sqlite3
   con = sqlite3.connect("tutorial.db")

SQLite will implicitly create an empty database file :file:`tutorial.db`

> in the current working directory if it does not exist.

Reviewer: This still seems a bit backwards to me, since it says in order that:
1. we need to connect to the db (which db?)
2. we can use `sqlite.connect` to connect (connect to what?)
3. we don't need to create the db since it will create it automatically

I think it would be better to say:
1. we have to create a new empty db and connect to it
2. (why connect?) the connection will allow us to work with it
3. (how to create/connect?) `sqlite.connect` connects to the db and creates it if it doesn't exist

Reviewer 2: At least partially my fault, but I added a suggestion to try to implement this

Author: I've reworded it so it now says:

- we have to create a new and empty db
- we need to connect to it, because we need the connections to work with the db
- show the user how to connect
- explain that, as a result of the connect, SQLite will implicitly create the file on-disk and a connection object is now available

> in the current working directory if it does not exist.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```

Elide this, as it was moved above per @ezio-melotti 's suggestions

The returned :class:`Connection` object ``con``
represents the connection to the on-disk database.

In order to execute SQL statements and fetch results from SQL queries,
use a database cursor.

> Call :meth:`~Connection.cursor` on ``con`` to create
> :class:`Cursor` ``cur``::

Reviewer: This sentence is a bit of a mouthful.  The suggestion makes it more readable, even though a bit less explicit.
```suggestion
Call :meth:`con.cursor() <Connection.cursor>` to create the :class:`Cursor`::
```

Reviewer 2: My fault; that's a lot better

Author: Agreed; that's better. I'll apply that across the PR.

> My fault; that's a lot better

No sweat; your suggestion was an improvement to the previous revisions :)

   cur = con.cursor()

Now, create a database table ``movie`` with columns for title,

> year released, and `IMDB`_ review score.

Reviewer: "Release year" sounds better to me, not sure which one is preferable.
```suggestion
release year, and `IMDB`_ review score.
```

I would also drop the mention and the link to IMDb (with lowercase "b" btw), since it's not really relevant to the tutorial.

Reviewer 2: Agreed with both :+1:

Reviewer 2: So

```suggestion
release year, and review score.
```

Author: Agreed; thanks both!

The `flexible typing`_ feature of SQLite makes typenames optional;
for simplicity, just use column names in the table declaration.
Execute the SQL statement

> by calling :meth:`~Cursor.execute` on ``cur``::

Reviewer: Here again you could use if you want to trade some explicitness for readability.
```suggestion
by calling :meth:`cur.execute() <Cursor.execute>`::
```

The same applies below too, or whenever you have ```call/use :meth:`...` on ``obj`` ```.

Author: +1

BTW, I'm using ellipse to indicate the exlucded parameters `cur.execute(...)` for methods with params.

   cur.execute("CREATE TABLE Movie(Title, Year, Score)")

> Verify that the table has been created by running a query against it.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
You can verify that the table has been created by running a query against it.
```

Be more clear that this provides the motivation, not the specific instructions (I found it confusing with the line below, which started the actual instructions, otherwise)

Reviewer: I was thinking about the tone of the whole tutorial.  To me imperative statements like this ("Verify...") sound a bit "cold" and demanding.  In general I prefer to use first person plural ("We can verify...") which gives the impression that we are following the reader step by step.  Second person singular ("You can verify...") is better then the bare imperative, but gives a bit the impression that the reader is on their own (which is kind of true, and not necessarily a bad thing).

Does Diataxis say anything about which person should we (you?) use?

Author: The tone is definitely something to consider. Imperative works well for the reference, but as you say, it may feel a little unwelcoming for a tutorial. If we decide to change the tone, let's do that after we've got all the other nits and details sorted out.

Reviewer 2: I typically default to "we" myself personally, though not for any well thought out reason, just force of habit and what sounds natural to me. But I went with the second person singular in the suggestions since that's what most of the tutorial used, and it seemed to reflect (at least in my own personal take) Diataxis' recommendations the best:

> Does Diataxis say anything about which person should we (you?) use?

Not explicitly, but it seems to generally be implied, since all but one of [the examples it gives](https://diataxis.fr/tutorials/#the-language-of-tutorials) use imperative or second person singular, the one remaining using first person plural. It also aligns with the overall focus of the text toward giving the learner direct, practical instructions in what to do.

I also looked it up on Stack Overflow, and the few answers I found, such as [this one](https://english.stackexchange.com/questions/295490/user-tutorial-to-be-written-in-first-or-second-person) that recommended against first personal plural as it places the emphasis on the software creator rather than the user, and recommended either second person singular for less formal or third person plural for more formal ("users") contexts—the latter would be out of step with the tone of the rest of the Python docs, and seems even colder and impersonal, so I stuck with the former.

> Execute the query by calling :meth:`~Cursor.execute` on ``cur``,

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Execute the query by calling :meth:`cur.execute() <Cursor.execute>`,
```

store the result in a variable ``res``,

> and call :meth:`~Cursor.fetchone` on ``res`` to fetch the first

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
and call :meth:`res.fetchone() <Cursor.fetchone>` to fetch the first
```

(and only) row from the query::

   >>> res = cur.execute("SELECT count(rowid) FROM Movie")
   >>> res.fetchone()
   (0,)

The result is a one-item :class:`tuple`:
one row, with one column.

> It correctly shows a row count of zero.

Reviewer: This part is a bit confusing.  IIUC it tries to verify the existence of the table indirectly, by trying to read the content of the table and checking that no error is raised (?).  However it's not obvious that a row count of `0` (which seems to indicate lack of result/emptiness) means that the table exist.

Isn't there a query that can be used to list the tables (so that we can check if our `Movie` table is in there), or alternatively a query that returns true if the table exists?

Reviewer 2: I agree; I may be a SQL n00b but I was quite confused by this as well, for the same reasons @ezio-melotti mentioned

Author: Hm, yeah. These things are obvious to me, but I understand that they might not be to everyone else. There are several solutions:

Once could prove that no table existed by first running a query and verifying we get an exception. However, I don't think that makes for a good tutorial.

We could query the SQLite master table, but that would be delving into SQLite internals, which would probably require expanding the tutorial with some sentences about the [sqlite_schema table](https://www.sqlite.org/schematab.html). I'm not sure if that makes for a better tutorial either.

Maybe the best thing to do, is just to mention that we expect a row count of zero, since there is now data in the table, and that we'd get an exception if the table was not created.

Author: I tried adding a variant of querying the schema; I'm not sure it worked out, though.

Reviewer 2: Seems to make intuitive sense to me, for what its worth

Reviewer: FWIW I think it's important to mention `sqlite_schema`.  Whenever I came across a DB the first thing that I want to do is printing a list of tables to get an idea of what's inside the DB, and every DB does that in a different way and I always have to google how to do it.

It might even be a good idea adding an "how to see the list of tables/columns".
(unresolving so the comment doesn't get lost)

Author: > (unresolving so the comment doesn't get lost)

Thanks!

> FWIW I think it's important to mention sqlite_schema. Whenever I came across a DB the first thing that I want to do is printing a list of tables to get an idea of what's inside the DB, and every DB does that in a different way and I always have to google how to do it.

That is a good point. There are some basic SQLite tricks that is worth knowing about. Perhaps we could put those into a howto? One of the most useful is the `pragma compile_options` query, from 3.12, even more available:

```
$ cd cpython.git
# configure && make
$ ./python -m sqlite3 :memory: "pragma compile_options" 
```

Author: Actually, mentioning the new CLI could be worth it for the >= 3.12 tutorial.

Now, add two rows of data supplied as SQL literals

> by executing an ``INSERT`` statement,
> once again by calling :meth:`~Cursor.execute` on ``cur``::

Reviewer: ```suggestion
by executing an ``INSERT`` statement with :meth:`cur.execute() <Cursor.execute>`::
```

Author: I think leaving the "once again" is nice, because it reminds the user that we should now be familiar with the `execute` method. Maybe it is not needed.

Reviewer 2: Seems fair enough to me

   cur.execute("""
       INSERT INTO Movie VALUES

>            ('Monty Python and the Holy Grail', 1975, 8.2),
>            ('And Now for Something Completely Different', 1971, 7.5)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
           ('And Now for Something Completely Different', 1971, 7.5)
           ('Monty Python and the Holy Grail', 1975, 8.2),
```
Maybe add them in chronological order?

P.S.: now I see you wanted them mixed in order to showcase the `ORDER BY`.

Reviewer 2: Should this comment be marked resolved, then?

   """)

The ``INSERT`` statement implicitly opens a transaction,
which needs to be committed before changes are saved in the database
(see :ref:`sqlite3-controlling-transactions` for details).

> Call :meth:`~Connection.commit` on the connection object

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Call :meth:`con.commit() <Connection.commit>`
```

to commit the transaction::

   con.commit()

Execute a query to verify that the data was inserted correctly.

> Use the now familiar :meth:`~Cursor.execute` method on ``con``,
> store the result in ``res``,
> and call :meth:`~Cursor.fetchall` on ``res`` to fetch all rows::

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Use the now familiar :meth:`con.execute <Cursor.execute>` method to
store the result in ``res``, and call :meth:`res.fetchall() <Cursor.fetchall>`
to fetch all rows::
```

   >>> res = cur.execute("SELECT Score FROM Movie")
   >>> res.fetchall()
   [(8.2,), (7.5,)]

The result is a :class:`list` with two rows of data,

> each a one-item :class:`tuple`,

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
each a one-item :class:`!tuple`,
```

Already mentioned a few lines up in the same tutorial—though that might change, depending on if there is a different query to use

Reviewer: If we do this it looks asymmetric with the list, so we can either:
* leave it like this (double linked `tuple`)
* link both `list` and `tuple` here, but not elsewhere
* apply your suggestion despite the asymmetry

Author: I agree with CAM here; with the latest revision (soon to be pushed), there is now to links to tuple: one early and one late. If we leave out the one in the middle, the link to `list` stands out better.

> the single item representing the column queried.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
containing the value from the single column queried.
```

Be much more clear and straightforward here

> Now, insert three more rows by calling
> :meth:`~Cursor.executemany` on the cursor object,
> once again committing the transaction by calling :meth:`~Connection.commit`
> on the connection object::
> 
>    data = [
>        ("Monty Python Live at the Hollywood Bowl", 1982, 7.9),
>        ("Monty Python's The Meaning of Life", 1983, 7.5),
>        ("Monty Python's Life of Brian", 1979, 8.0),
>    ]
>    cur.executemany("INSERT INTO Movie VALUES(?, ?, ?)", data)
>    con.commit()

Reviewer: I would avoid repeating the part about `commit` in the prose, since it's somewhat distracting from the newly introduced `executemany`, and move it as a comment in the code where it appears in context after that the `executemany` is being dealt with.
```suggestion
Now, insert three more rows by calling
:meth:`~Cursor.executemany` on the cursor object::

   data = [
       ("Monty Python Live at the Hollywood Bowl", 1982, 7.9),
       ("Monty Python's The Meaning of Life", 1983, 7.5),
       ("Monty Python's Life of Brian", 1979, 8.0),
   ]
   cur.executemany("INSERT INTO Movie VALUES(?, ?, ?)", data)
   con.commit()  # remember to commit after executing the query
```

Notice that ``?`` placeholders are used to bind ``data`` to the query.
Always use placeholders instead of :ref:`string formatting <tut-formatting>`
to bind Python values to SQL statements,
to avoid `SQL injection attacks`_.
See :ref:`sqlite3-placeholders` for more details.

Verify that data has been committed and written to disk by
closing the connection and opening a new one,
creating a new cursor,
and then executing a ``SELECT`` query to read from the database::

   >>> con.close()
   >>> con2 = sqlite3.connect("tutorial.db")

>    >>> cur2 = con2.cursor()

Reviewer: This part seems misleading.  Before we didn't have to close and reopen the connection to verify that the table had been created, so why do we need to do it now?  Are changes not saved until you close the connection?  Or are you just trying to introduce the `connection.close` method and showing how to connect to an existing db?

If it's the latter, I wouldn't "hide" it in the middle of a verification, but I would move it at the end of the tutorial.  Once everything is done, close the db and mention that the data is permanently stored in the file, and that you can reconnect and retrieve it at any moment (possibly showing an example of another `SELECT`).

Reviewer 2: Also, this states that a select query will be executed, but doesn't do it, and then states it again and does it that time, which eliding the `close` bit would avoid.

Author: The SELECT is leftovers from the earlier revision; it is executed in the following example.

The point of this step is to verify that changes are written to disk, not that the table has been created (we already did that). I'll try to make that clearer.

Author: Introducing connection.close() should also be done. I'll add that as well.

Author: Rewritten, however I believe it came out a little bulky, since we now mix the verification with introducing the interation over the cursor. Let me know what you think.

Reviewer 2: Yeah, it is rather dense. I would just split it up into two chunks again, but with separate, appropriate descriptive prose for each part.

Author: Introducing the cursor iterator earlier will help; then we'd only need the users attention for the verification here.

This time, retrieve the rows by iterating over the result
of the ``SELECT`` query::

   >>> for row in cur2.execute("SELECT Year, Title FROM Movie ORDER BY Year"):
   ...     print(row)
   ...
   (1971, "And Now for Something Completely Different")
   (1975, "Monty Python and the Holy Grail")
   (1979, "Monty Python's Life of Brian")
   (1982, "Monty Python Live at the Hollywood Bowl")
   (1983, "Monty Python's The Meaning of Life")

> Each row is now a two-item :class:`!tuple`.

Reviewer: It would be better to be more explicit on why it's a two-item tuple and what the two items are, so that readers can build a connection between the query and the result::
```suggestion
Each row is a ``(Year, Title)`` :class:`!tuple`.
```
If you prefer something more verbose: `Each row is a two-item tuple that contains the selected columns: ``Year`` and ``Title``.`

Also I've seen two tuples linked, and this third isn't.

Reviewer 2: Or, perhaps a little clearer but no more verbose:

```suggestion
Each row is now a two-item :class:`!tuple` of ``(Year, Title)``.
```

Author: +1

I actually had it more verbose in a revision I did not push.

Author: We can link the third tuple as well. Perhaps we should unlink the second.

You've now created an SQLite database using the :mod:`!sqlite3` module,
inserted data and ran several SQL queries against it.

> .. _IMDB: https://www.imdb.com/

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```

Elide as discussed above

      PEP written by Marc-André Lemburg.

.. We use the following practises for SQL code:
   - UPPERCASE for keywords
   - SnakeCase for schema
   - single quotes for string literals
   - singular for table names
   - if needed, use double quotes for table and column names

.. _sqlite3-tutorial:

Tutorial
--------

In this tutorial, you will learn the basics of the :mod:`!sqlite3` API
by creating an on-disk movie database :file:`tutorial.db`

> about Monty Python movies.

Reviewer 2: I suggest:

```suggestion
by creating an on-disk database of Monty Python movies.
```

* Avoid repeating "movie" twice ("movie database about Monty Python movies")
* Use more idiomatic and specific phrasing ("database about" -> "database of")
* More concise
* Given this is a high-level one sentence summary, is the particular name of the database file on disk an important enough detail to include here? At least to me, it would seem maybe not

Reviewer: `s/\?$/./`?

Reviewer 2: I don't speak `sed`, but by inspection I assume you're talking about the stray ``?``. I edited the suggestion to fix it, thanks :+1:

Author: Yeah. A lot better.

It assumes a fundamental understanding of database concepts,
including `cursors`_ and `transactions`_.

> First, create a new database to hold the movie data,

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
First, you'll need to create a new database to hold the movie data
```

Clearly separate the statement of the overall objective, what we need to do, from the specific instructions to actually execute that. Right now it says "Do this" then "Do that", and its unclear what the first statement is telling the user what they are _going_ to do, and the second actually _how_ to do it.

Author: +1

and open a database connection to allow :mod:`!sqlite3` to work with it.
Call the :func:`sqlite3.connect` function to
to create a connection to the database :file:`tutorial.db`,

> implicitly creating it in the current working directory if it does not exist::

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
to create a connection to the database :file:`tutorial.db`
in the current working directory,
implicitly creating it if it does not exist::
```

The present language implies the database is created in the current working directory if it doesn't exist, but leaves unspecified where/how the database is found otherwise, when in fact what is passed is just a (relative) path and it must be either in or created in whatever directory is specified by that path, i.e. it being in the CWD is a property of the file path itself, not specific to the "doesn't exist" branch of the logic (that's why I elided it before). Therefore, the "current working directory" detail should be moved to the first clause.

Author: Makes sense

Author: Did you change your mind regarding "the database" vs. "a database"? :)

Reviewer 2: Sorta, yeah, based on your feedback—at least, I don't see a strong reason to go with a different one than whatever you have now

   import sqlite3
   con = sqlite3.connect("tutorial.db")

The returned :class:`Connection` object ``con``

> represents the connection to the on-disk database.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
represents the connection to the database.
```
I think the `on-disk` is no longer necessary, since we already mentioned it above and then mentioned that it will be created in the CWD.

Reviewer 2: IMO, it makes more sense to say it here than where it is stated originally (and thus I suggested eliding it, but @erlend-aasland had a different viewpoint), but that's just my personal take.

Author: Perhaps it is best to leave it out both places. The _Introduction_ already explains that SQLite is a disk-based database.

Reviewer 2: I found it meaningful here in emphasizing the distinction between the connection object and the actual on-disk database, but ultimately up to you

In order to execute SQL statements and fetch results from SQL queries,
use a database cursor.
Call :meth:`con.cursor() <Connection.cursor>` to create the :class:`Cursor`::

   cur = con.cursor()

Now, create a database table ``movie`` with columns for title,
release year, and review score.

> The `flexible typing`_ feature of SQLite makes typenames optional;
> for simplicity, just use column names in the table declaration.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For simplicity, just use column names in the table declaration:
thanks to the `flexible typing`_ feature of SQLite, specifying the types is optional.
```
This suggestion uses a simpler terminology since `typenames` hasn't been introduced yet.

Author: That's better. Perhaps "data types" iso. "types".

Execute the SQL statement
by calling :meth:`con.execute() <Cursor.execute>`::

   cur.execute("CREATE TABLE Movie(Title, Year, Score)")

.. Ideally, we'd use sqlite_schema instead of sqlite_master below,

>    but earlier versions of SQLite does not recognise that variant.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
   but earlier versions of SQLite do not recognise that variant.
```

Plural agreement

Reviewer: Are the old versions common enough?  Is `sqlite_master` deprecated?
Maybe we could use `sqlite_schema` directly, or add a footnote or parenthetical to mention `sqlite_master`.

Author: `sqlite_master` is deprecated (in docs only). It will never be removed from SQLite 3.x.y; they have a super strict backwards compatibility policy. It is an alias to `sqlite3_schema`. I'm unsure when they changed it. Last time I checked, the changelog did not mention it. It may be worth it to mention both names, though.

Author: > I'm unsure when they changed it. Last time I checked, the changelog did not mention it.

<details>
<summary>Found out when they changed it</summary>

```
$ for N in $(seq 8 39); do echo -n "Checking SQLite 3.$N.0... " && (~/install/sqlite-3.$N.0/bin/sqlite3 :memory: "select * from sqlite_schema" &>/dev/null && echo ok || echo fail); done
Checking SQLite 3.8.0... fail
Checking SQLite 3.9.0... fail
Checking SQLite 3.10.0... fail
Checking SQLite 3.11.0... fail
Checking SQLite 3.12.0... fail
Checking SQLite 3.13.0... fail
Checking SQLite 3.14.0... fail
Checking SQLite 3.15.0... fail
Checking SQLite 3.16.0... fail
Checking SQLite 3.17.0... fail
Checking SQLite 3.18.0... fail
Checking SQLite 3.19.0... fail
Checking SQLite 3.20.0... fail
Checking SQLite 3.21.0... fail
Checking SQLite 3.22.0... fail
Checking SQLite 3.23.0... fail
Checking SQLite 3.24.0... fail
Checking SQLite 3.25.0... fail
Checking SQLite 3.26.0... fail
Checking SQLite 3.27.0... fail
Checking SQLite 3.28.0... fail
Checking SQLite 3.29.0... fail
Checking SQLite 3.30.0... fail
Checking SQLite 3.31.0... fail
Checking SQLite 3.32.0... fail
Checking SQLite 3.33.0... ok
Checking SQLite 3.34.0... ok
Checking SQLite 3.35.0... ok
Checking SQLite 3.36.0... ok
Checking SQLite 3.37.0... ok
Checking SQLite 3.38.0... ok
Checking SQLite 3.39.0... ok
```

</details>

Author: So, they added `sqlite_schema` in 3.33.0, which is fairly new. I don't think we should introduce the option of using `sqlite_schema`. IIRC, Diátaxis suggests to avoid options and alternatives in tutorials.

If we add a _SQLite tips and tricks_ howto, we can mention it there.

Reviewer: Or in the howto I proposed above about listing tables and columns.

Author: Agreed. See also my latest post on this PR.

> You can verify that the table has been created by querying

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
You can verify that the new table has been created by querying
```

Draw a bit more of a distinction vs. the other ``sqlite_master`` table

> the ever-present ``sqlite_master`` table.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
the always-present ``sqlite_master`` table.
```

"ever-present" has a more figurative meaning here than you presumably intend

Reviewer: What about using "built-in" instead? :thinking:

Reviewer 2: Hmm...I'm not sure the meaning is clear, especially due to the confounding with Python builtins. What about

```suggestion
the ``sqlite_master`` table built-in to SQLite.
```

?

Author: "built-in to SQLite" SGTM

It should contain an entry for the ``Movie`` table definition.

> Execute the query by calling :meth:`cur.execute(...) <Cursor.execute>`,

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Execute that query by calling :meth:`cur.execute(...) <Cursor.execute>`,
```

Be clearer that we're referring to the aforementioned query

store the result in a variable ``res``,
and call :meth:`res.fetchone() <Cursor.fetchone>` to fetch the first

> (and only) row from the query::

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
(and only) row that was returned::
```

Avoid repetition and be a little clearer

>    >>> res = cur.execute("SELECT name FROM sqlite_master where name='Movie'")

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
   >>> res = cur.execute("SELECT name FROM sqlite_master WHERE name='Movie'")
```

Is [WHERE](https://www.w3schools.com/sql/sql_ref_where.asp) not a SQL keyword, per your style guide above?

Author: Indeed it is

Author: Regarding the style guide... I think I'll revert the schema names from CamelCase to snake_case to be consistent with SQLite's own tables, like `sqlite_schema`.

>    >>> res = cur.execute("SELECT name FROM sqlite_master where name='Movie'")

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   >>> res = cur.execute("SELECT name FROM sqlite_master")
```
What happens if I just do this?
Having to specify the name might fail in case of typos.

Author: That's better, for the reason you provide.

   >>> res.fetchone()
   ('Movie',)

> The result is a one-item :class:`tuple`: one row, with one column.
> As expected, the query shows the table is now created.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As expected, the query shows the table is now created
by returning a single :class:`tuple` with the name of the table.
```

> As an exercise, try querying ``sqlite_master`` for a bogus name ``"abc"``::

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
As an exercise, try querying ``sqlite_master``
for a non-existent table ``"abc"``::
```

Be clearer, more specific and avoid potentially confusing language—"bogus" -> "non-existent" and "name" -> "table"

>    >>> res = cur.execute("SELECT name FROM sqlite_master where name='abc'")

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
   >>> res = cur.execute("SELECT name FROM sqlite_master WHERE name='abc'")
```

As above

>    >>> res = cur.execute("SELECT name FROM sqlite_master where name='abc'")

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   >>> res = cur.execute("SELECT name FROM sqlite_master where name='movie'")
```
Is `sqlite3` case-sensitive?  If it is, instead of using bogus tables, you might use this and get two birds with a stone (teach about case-sensitiveness and show what happens when a query returns no results).

Author: Most SQL dialects are case-insensitive in most ways. SQLite has some pragma options for case-sentitivity. Perhaps there are also some compile-time options.

   >>> res.fetchone()
   >>>

As expected, the query returns an empty result.

Now, add two rows of data supplied as SQL literals
by executing an ``INSERT`` statement,
once again by calling :meth:`cur.execute(...) <Cursor.execute>`::

   cur.execute("""
       INSERT INTO Movie VALUES
           ('Monty Python and the Holy Grail', 1975, 8.2),
           ('And Now for Something Completely Different', 1971, 7.5)
   """)

The ``INSERT`` statement implicitly opens a transaction,
which needs to be committed before changes are saved in the database
(see :ref:`sqlite3-controlling-transactions` for details).
Call :meth:`con.commit() <Connection.commit>` on the connection object
to commit the transaction::

   con.commit()

Execute a query to verify that the data was inserted correctly.

> Use the now familiar :meth:`con.execute(...) <Cursor.execute>` to

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Use the now-familiar :meth:`con.execute(...) <Cursor.execute>` to
```

store the result in ``res``,
and call :meth:`res.fetchall() <Cursor.fetchall>` to fetch all rows::

   >>> res = cur.execute("SELECT Score FROM Movie")
   >>> res.fetchall()
   [(8.2,), (7.5,)]

> The result is a :class:`list` with two rows of data,
> each a one-item :class:`!tuple`,
> containing the value from the single column queried.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The result is a :class:`list` of two :class:`!tuple`\ s (one per row),
each containing a single value (the ``Score`` from the query).
```

Reviewer 2: IMO, that variation is less easy to understand, particularly due to the multiple parenthetical in the same sentence. Also, FYI you can just do ``:class:`!tuple`\s``; no need to add a space.

Author: I used a variant with less parentheses. I think it came out nice.

Now, insert three more rows by calling
:meth:`cur.executemany(...) <Cursor.executemany>`::

   data = [
       ("Monty Python Live at the Hollywood Bowl", 1982, 7.9),
       ("Monty Python's The Meaning of Life", 1983, 7.5),
       ("Monty Python's Life of Brian", 1979, 8.0),
   ]
   cur.executemany("INSERT INTO Movie VALUES(?, ?, ?)", data)
   con.commit()  # Remember to commit the transaction after executing INSERT.

Notice that ``?`` placeholders are used to bind ``data`` to the query.
Always use placeholders instead of :ref:`string formatting <tut-formatting>`
to bind Python values to SQL statements,
to avoid `SQL injection attacks`_.

> See :ref:`sqlite3-placeholders` for more details.

Reviewer: For consistency with the transaction above, this should be `(see ... for details).`

Verify that data has been written to disk by

> calling :meth:`con.close() <Connection.close>` to close the connection,

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
calling :meth:`con.close() <Connection.close>`
to close the existing connection,
```

Draw an appropriate distinction with "a new one" for clarity

opening a new one, creating a new cursor,
then executing a ``SELECT`` query, this time iterating over the results
of the query to read from the database::

   >>> con.close()
   >>> con2 = sqlite3.connect("tutorial.db")
   >>> cur2 = con2.cursor()
   >>> for row in cur2.execute("SELECT Year, Title FROM Movie ORDER BY Year"):
   ...     print(row)

>    ...

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```

This continuation line can be elided, since it is just an artifact of the particular interactive interpreter

      PEP written by Marc-André Lemburg.

.. We use the following practises for SQL code:
   - UPPERCASE for keywords
   - snake_case for schema
   - single quotes for string literals
   - singular for table names
   - if needed, use double quotes for table and column names

.. _sqlite3-tutorial:

Tutorial
--------

> In this tutorial, you will learn the basics of the :mod:`!sqlite3` API

Reviewer 3: I'm not actually keen on "you will learn..." - it seems presumptuous and raises too many questions. What if the user fails to learn, or only learns a part of what you wanted to teach? Is it even possible for a user to learn, in a meaningful way, all these things through just one lesson?

I prefer to say things like "This tutorial is designed to help you learn [whatever]" or "to help you become familiar with", etc. And then:  "you will encounter...", "you will use...", you will build...".

Reviewer 2: I missed this one, but I really should have caught it by now—you stress this multiple times in the tutorial section, and I even quoted 

> Describe what the learner will accomplish (note - not: “you will learn…”).

Author: How about this:

```diff
-In this tutorial, you will learn the basics of the :mod:`!sqlite3` API
-by creating a database of Monty Python movies.
+In this tutorial, you will create a database of Monty Python movies,
+using basic :mod:`!sqlite3` APIs.
```

by creating a database of Monty Python movies.
It assumes a fundamental understanding of database concepts,
including `cursors`_ and `transactions`_.

First, you'll need to create a new database to hold the movie data

> and open a database connection to allow :mod:`!sqlite3` to work with it.

Reviewer: I read this as "you'll need to create a new db to hold and open".  An easy fix is to add "then" ("...and then open"), however we can also drop part of the sentence that seems redundant to me:
```suggestion
First, you'll need to create a new database and open a
database connection to allow :mod:`!sqlite3` to work with it.
```

Reviewer 2: Yeah, I kept being tempted to suggest adding "then" myself for this reason, but I kept demurring due to it not actually being two distinct steps in the example. The simplification is a better play which avoids that.

> Call the :func:`sqlite3.connect` function to

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Call :func:`sqlite3.connect` to
```

This could simplify this now rather complex sentence somewhat without really loosing meaning

Author: I agree. I think we deliberately changed these earlier in this PRs history, for some reason. I prefer the concise variant.

> to create a connection to a database :file:`tutorial.db`

Reviewer: Does this sound better?
```suggestion
to create a connection to a :file:`tutorial.db` database
```

Reviewer 2: IMO, its less idiomatic, and arguably less clear

Reviewer: Fair enough, to me "tutorial.db" here is almost like an adjective, but I'm not a native speaker.  The meaning is clear either way :)

in the current working directory,
implicitly creating it if it does not exist::

   import sqlite3
   con = sqlite3.connect("tutorial.db")

The returned :class:`Connection` object ``con``
represents the connection to the database.

In order to execute SQL statements and fetch results from SQL queries,

> you'll use a database cursor.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
you need to use a database cursor.
```
I prefer this than "you'll".  The latter sounds a bit demanding, since it sounds like the tutorial is telling the user that they must do what the tutorial says.  "You need to use" sounds less forceful to me, simply informing the user what they need to do to proceed to the next step.

If this change is accepted, there are more instances that need to be updated.

Reviewer 2: IMO,  at least as a native American-English speaker, the suggestion actually sounds slightly _more_ demanding to me, whereas "you'll" doesn't as much—but obviously it varies from person to person, so take that as just another data point. On the other hand I tend to avoid contractions in documentation, since it can be harder to understand for some international audiences and many doc style guides recommend against it.

Reviewer: To elaborate a bit, this is how different options sound to me:
* "you'll use a db cursor" sounds like an inexorable prediction that not only you will do something, but that you will do it that way.
* "you must use a db cursor" sounds like an order (which I could possible decide to ignore and deal with the consequences).
* "you have to use a db cursor" sounds a bit more matter-of-factly, without necessarily implying that the user will do it (only if they want to execute queries)..
* "you need to use a db cursor" similar to "have to", but slightly less forceful IMHO (even though admittedly it depends on the context and tone).
* "you can use a db cursor" sounds like there are other options too, but you can pick this one.

Author: FWIW, as a non-native speaker, here's how I perceive this, ordered by "niceness", most stringent last. I exclude "you can use", since it does not make sense when describing unambiguous steps.

- you'll use / you will use
- you need to use
- you must use
- you have to use

I don't know what's best regarding "you will ned to use" and "you need to use"

Author: I do agree with CAM regarding contractions; for now, I'll change it to "you will use".

Reviewer 2: > I don't know what's best regarding "you will ned to use" and "you need to use"

They say different things; the former introduces what _will_ be required, while "you need to use" is a command. In this case, the former is what you want. It is also much nicer. However, "you need to use" is nicer and more appropriate, IMO, than "you will use" and avoids some of the potential concern @ezio-melotti had about telling students what they _will_ inevitably do in the future, as opposed to what they will _need_ to do (if they are following the tutorial).

> I do agree with CAM regarding contractions; for now, I'll change it to "you will use".

IMO, to me "you will use" is a fair bit less "nice" and friendly than "you'll use", so we might need to decide which is the priority here. But "you will need to use" is about equally nice and more appropriate as a replacement.

Author: BTW; isn't "you will need to use" slightly more polite than "you need to use"?

Author: As a non-native speaker, I trust your judgements here.

Reviewer 2: > BTW; isn't "you will need to use" slightly more polite than "you need to use"?

Not just more polite, but as I mention also more appropriate in this particular context, and helps address @ezio-melotti 's concern:

> They say different things; the former introduces what will be required, while "you need to use" is a command. In this case, the former is what you want. It is also much nicer. However, "you need to use" is nicer and more appropriate, IMO, than "you will use" and avoids some of the potential concern @ezio-melotti had about telling students what they will inevitably do in the future, as opposed to what they will need to do (if they are following the tutorial).

Call :meth:`con.cursor() <Connection.cursor>` to create the :class:`Cursor`::

   cur = con.cursor()

> Now you'll create a database table ``movie`` with columns for title,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Now you can create a database table ``movie`` with columns for title,
```
You don't need to use just use "need" instead of "will" (as suggested above) -- you can also use "can", which still sounds less demanding.

Reviewer 2: I'm not sure about this—[per Diataxis](https://diataxis.fr/tutorials/), the purpose of tutorials is to instruct the reader in the steps they "need" to complete to accomplish a basic goal with the module, not simply letting them know what they "can" do. And per [The language of tutorials](https://diataxis.fr/tutorials/#the-language-of-tutorials), the examples given all use clear, direct language telling the reader what _to_ do:

> First, do x. Now, do y. Now that you have done y, do z.

Reviewer: I'm not sure how literally that example should be taken.  ISTM the point of the example was to show a clear and not ambiguous sequence of steps, rather than the words and tenses used.  Maybe @evildmp can confirm? (I'd also appreciate a look over the whole PR once we are done tweaking)

Reviewer 2: Fair, though I wasn't just looking at that example—it was based off (at least my interpretation of) a number of other statements there, e.g. [emphasis original]

> The only responsibility of the pupil is to be attentive and to follow the teacher’s directions as closely as they can.

> *Your guidance needs to remain focused on what’s required to reach the conclusion*

On the other hand, it also states

> It helps to maintain a friendly tone,

I definitely appreciate the value in such, and we don't want to sound overly harsh—but we also don't want to be too equivocal or hesitant that clarity, directness or crispness is affected.

Reviewer 3: Yes, it's about the clarity of sequence, and emphasising the specific actions that need to be taken.

The verbs do make a difference though, but I wouldn't say it's the difference between right and wrong. 

### _Can_

I think I'd only use _can_:

* if we've been working towards something that we've had to defer until this moment (_Now that we have initialised the database, we can create the table we need_)
* if I want to signal that we're doing something that's not strictly required (e.g. good practice: _We can shut down the database connection to save resources, so..._. Or maybe to explore: (_You can terminate and reopen the session at any time: [some command]_).

### _We_ vs _you_

Different projects have different styles. Still, my own preference is generally something like:

> Now we need to initialise the database, so run the appropriate command in the terminal:
>
> `some command whatever`

I like this because it puts the tutor and the learner together in the same situation, as though we were sitting over the same piece of work. But, it's the learner who is performing the actions. Our need, their activity; it's how we naturally speak to someone when we are teaching them a practical skill. 

Other reasons I like the first person plural:

* I wouldn't use it in a how-to guide (I would just say: _Initialise the database..._), so it become another way of maintaining a distinction between the forms of a tutorial and those of a how-to guide.
* I think it helps us as authors to see the situation the user is in, because we have placed ourselves in that situation too.

Reviewer 2: > I like this because it puts the tutor and the learner together in the same situation, as though we were sitting over the same piece of work. But, it's the learner who is performing the actions. Our need, their activity; it's how we naturally speak to someone when we are teaching them a practical skill.

That is very insightful and connects well; I'd appreciate having at least some kind of guidance like that in Diataxis itself, as I went looking and didn't find any. I would "naturally" default to the same in that context myself, because I want the reader to feel as if we have a shared objective and we're in this together, but they are the one actually doing the work (which is typically how I frame it when I'm doing 1 on 1 tutoring). However, I couldn't find any clear guidance in Diataxis, and when I went looking elsewhere, some other sources strongly discouraged "we" for not centering the reader.

Author: Very insightful indeed. I believe we should consider using first person plural again before landing this, for the reasons provided.

release year, and review score.

> For simplicitly, just use column names in the table declaration:
> thanks to the `flexible typing`_ feature of SQLite,

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
For simplicity, just use column names in the table declaration —
thanks to the `flexible typing`_ feature of SQLite,
```

or

```suggestion
For simplicity, just use column names in the table declaration;
thanks to the `flexible typing`_ feature of SQLite,
```

* Fix spelling typo
* A parenthetical (em dash/semicolon) instead of colon makes more sense here, IMO

Reviewer: FWIW in Sphinx you can create en and em dashes using `--` and `---` respectively, without having to include them directly in the rst.

Reviewer 2: I see—is there a reason to avoid the literal characters in the source? At least for me its a lot simpler to just enter the normal characters directly (via Alt-0150/0151 or Option (Shift) -) since that's what works everywhere else, vs. trying to remember a bespoke RST-specific method.

Author: I prefer the `--` variant, as it is easier to spot when reading the raw text.

Reviewer: > I see—is there a reason to avoid the literal characters in the source?

Back then, non-ASCII characters used to break the PDF build, but I think we are past those dark times.  There is still value in keeping the docs ASCII-only -- not everyone expects, recognizes, and is able to type non-ASCII characters easily, which might either lead to inconsistencies or accidentally replacing a `—` with a `-`.

> I prefer the `--` variant, as it is easier to spot when reading the raw text.

On the other hand, it's very easy to mix `--` and `---` up, since most people use `--` when they want an em dash, whereas Sphinx wants `---` and uses `--` for en dash. :upside_down_face:

specifying the data types is optional.
Execute the ``CREATE TABLE`` statement
by calling :meth:`con.execute() <Cursor.execute>`::

   cur.execute("CREATE TABLE movie(title, year, score)")

.. Ideally, we'd use sqlite_schema instead of sqlite_master below,

>    but earlier versions of SQLite do not recognise that variant.

Reviewer: Since you figured out which version introduced `sqlite_schema`, maybe you can update the comment to mention the version and the date, so that in a few years we won't have to do it again.

You can verify that the new table has been created by querying

> the ``sqlite_master`` table built-in to SQLite.
> It should contain an entry for the ``movie`` table definition.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
the ``sqlite_master`` table built-in to SQLite,
which should contain an entry for the ``movie`` table definition.
```

Reduce choppiness/improve flow

Execute that query by calling :meth:`cur.execute(...) <Cursor.execute>`,

> store the result in a variable ``res``,

Reviewer: Just a nit, but technically we are not "storing the result in a variable".  This works for languages like C where variables correspond to specific memory location (where you store the data), but in Python variables are just references to an object.

In addition, people reading this tutorial should already be familiar with how functions/methods work, and the fact that they return a value that you can assign to a variable, so you can probably omit this.

Reviewer 2: I thought about mentioning this, but at least at the time I wasn't sure if it was worth complicating things for beginners. But it does irk me too.

The reason it is mentioned is because it is referred to in the next clause, so we need to say *something*. What about 

```suggestion
assign the result to ``res``,
```

That's both simpler and more correct.

and call :meth:`res.fetchone() <Cursor.fetchone>` to fetch the first
(and only) row that was returned::

   >>> res = cur.execute("SELECT name FROM sqlite_master")
   >>> res.fetchone()
   ('movie',)

> As expected, the query shows the table is now created
> by returning a single :class:`tuple`: with the name of the table.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
As expected, the query shows the table has been created,
as it returns a :class:`tuple` containing the name of the table.
```

* Greatly reduce syntactic and semantic ambiguity and confusion
* Elide apparently spurious colon

As an exercise, try querying ``sqlite_master``

> for a non-existent table ``"abc"``::

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
for a non-existent table ``abc``::
```

The table name (as you've referred to e.g. `sqlite_master` here and `movie` elsewhere) is `abc`, not the string literal (which is incidental to this use case)

   >>> res = cur.execute("SELECT name FROM sqlite_master WHERE name='abc'")
   >>> res.fetchone()
   >>>

As expected, the query returns an empty result.

Now, you'll add two rows of data supplied as SQL literals
by executing an ``INSERT`` statement,
once again by calling :meth:`cur.execute(...) <Cursor.execute>`::

   cur.execute("""
       INSERT INTO movie VALUES
           ('Monty Python and the Holy Grail', 1975, 8.2),
           ('And Now for Something Completely Different', 1971, 7.5)
   """)

> The ``INSERT`` statement implicitly opens a transaction,

Reviewer: Something that is not immediately obvious to me, and that it might be worth mentioning (here or elsewhere (e.g. in the transactions howto)), is that it appears that not all queries open a transaction.  In this tutorial the `CREATE` and the `SELECT` don't seem to open it, whereas the `INSERT` does.

After which queries do I need to commit?

Reviewer 2: FYI, the second sentence of the Transaction Control section linked here states,

> If the connection attribute [isolation_level](https://docs.python.org/3.12/library/sqlite3.html#sqlite3.Connection.isolation_level) is not None, new transactions are implicitly opened before [execute()](https://docs.python.org/3.12/library/sqlite3.html#sqlite3.Cursor.execute) and [executemany()](https://docs.python.org/3.12/library/sqlite3.html#sqlite3.Cursor.executemany) executes INSERT, UPDATE, DELETE, or REPLACE statements.

I'm not sure whether its worth complicating the tutorial by explicitly enumerating those here

Reviewer: If it's already mentioned in the linked section, then you can disregard my comment.

which needs to be committed before changes are saved in the database
(see :ref:`sqlite3-controlling-transactions` for details).
Call :meth:`con.commit() <Connection.commit>` on the connection object
to commit the transaction::

   con.commit()

You can verify that the data was inserted correctly
by executing a ``SELECT`` query.
Use the now-familiar :meth:`con.execute(...) <Cursor.execute>` to

> store the result in ``res``,

Reviewer: See comment above.

Reviewer 2: You could say

```suggestion
assign the result to ``res``,
```

and call :meth:`res.fetchall() <Cursor.fetchall>` to fetch all rows::

   >>> res = cur.execute("SELECT score FROM movie")
   >>> res.fetchall()
   [(8.2,), (7.5,)]

> The result is a :class:`list` of two :class:`!tuple`\s, one per row,
> each containing a the ``score`` from the query.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The result is a :class:`list` of two :class:`!tuple`\s, one per row,
each containing the ``score`` from the query.
```
I like this phrasing.  What I wanted to convey is that tuples correspond to rows, and the tuple items to (the selected) columns).  Even though it's not explicitly stated, I think it's clear enough.

Reviewer 2: To that end, it should be "a" [single] score, not "the" score from the query which would imply there is only a single score per query, thus multiple queries (one per row) rather than multiple scores

```suggestion
The result is a :class:`list` of two :class:`!tuple`\s, one per row,
each containing a ``score`` from the query.
```

Reviewer: Here "score" is referring to the `score` column selected in the query (hence the ` ``...`` `), not the numeric value(s) found in the tuple(s).

Reviewer 2: Yes, but again, using "the" in "each containing _the_ score from the query", implies there is one query per row, which is not the case. 

I drew that initial conclusion from a casual read of the sentence, but breaking it down from a semantic perspective, we can see why a reader could be confused. In this context, "the `score`" can't be referring to the whole column (the thing there is only one of in the query) as opposed to the _value_ of the column for each row (of which there is one per row, but multiple per query), because "_each_" tuple (thus each row, as stated) is stated to contain exactly one of "the score". Then, while there _is_ "_the_ score from the _row_", what is is stated is "_the_ score from the _query_", which means there must exactly one of these _per-row_ scores per one query. Therefore, this directly implies there is one query _per row_, which is of course not the case.

However, you _could_ also reword this, perhaps more clearly:

```suggestion
The result is a :class:`list` of two :class:`!tuple`\s, one per row,
each containing the ``score`` from the row.
```

Author: How about this (diff from a few lines above):

```diff
-and call :meth:`res.fetchall() <Cursor.fetchall>` to fetch all rows::
+and call :meth:`res.fetchall() <Cursor.fetchall>` to
+return a :class:`list` of all resulting rows::
 
    >>> res = cur.execute("SELECT score FROM movie")
    >>> res.fetchall()
    [(8.2,), (7.5,)]
 
+As expected, the resulting :class:`!list` contains two rows
+as :class:`!tuple`\s of ``(score,)``.
```

Reviewer 2: IMO, making the structure explicit could be helpful, but I'm not sure splitting up and/or duplicating the discussion of the return type before and after the example makes sense. What about this?

```suggestion
The result is a :class:`list` of two :class:`!tuple`\s, one per row,
each containing that row's ``score`` value.
```

"As expected" seems to put an expectation on the student that they will know _a priori_ what will be returned, which I'm not sure is very Diataxis-y given what @evildmp has said

Author: SGTM

Now, you'll insert three more rows by calling
:meth:`cur.executemany(...) <Cursor.executemany>`::

   data = [
       ("Monty Python Live at the Hollywood Bowl", 1982, 7.9),
       ("Monty Python's The Meaning of Life", 1983, 7.5),
       ("Monty Python's Life of Brian", 1979, 8.0),
   ]
   cur.executemany("INSERT INTO movie VALUES(?, ?, ?)", data)
   con.commit()  # Remember to commit the transaction after executing INSERT.

Notice that ``?`` placeholders are used to bind ``data`` to the query.
Always use placeholders instead of :ref:`string formatting <tut-formatting>`
to bind Python values to SQL statements,
to avoid `SQL injection attacks`_
(see :ref:`sqlite3-placeholders` for more details).

You can verify that the new rows were inserted
by executing a ``SELECT`` query,
this time iterating over the results of the query::

   >>> for row in cur.execute("SELECT year, title FROM movie ORDER BY year"):
   ...     print(row)
   (1971, "And Now for Something Completely Different")
   (1975, "Monty Python and the Holy Grail")
   (1979, "Monty Python's Life of Brian")
   (1982, "Monty Python Live at the Hollywood Bowl")
   (1983, "Monty Python's The Meaning of Life")

> Each row is now a two-item :class:`tuple` of ``(year, title)``.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Each row is now a two-item :class:`tuple` of ``(year, title)``,
matching the columns selected in the query.
```
If we want to be more explicit we could add this. "Specified" instead of "selected" also works.

Author: I don't think it hurts to be slightly more explicit here. I like "selected", as it reflects nicely on the query.

Author: I also think we can drop the "now" in "each row is now a two-item tuple".

> At last, you'll verify that the database has been written to disk by

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Finally, you'll verify that the database has been written to disk by
```

"At least" doesn't carry the connotations you presumably want here; it implies you've been wanting to do something for a long time, and then finally do it, which isn't really the case here, as this is just a simple verification step that wasn't talked about before, not the end goal. "Finally" is much more appropriate to what you presumably intend,

calling :meth:`con.close() <Connection.close>`
to close the existing connection,
opening a new one, creating a new cursor,
then reusing the query from above to read from the database::

   >>> con.close()
   >>> con2 = sqlite3.connect("tutorial.db")
   >>> cur2 = con2.cursor()

>    >>> for row in cur.execute("SELECT year, title FROM movie ORDER BY year"):

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   >>> for row in cur2.execute("SELECT year, title FROM movie ORDER BY year"):
```
Instead of `con2` and `cur2`, you could call them `new_con` and `new_cur`.

   ...     print(row)
   (1971, "And Now for Something Completely Different")
   (1975, "Monty Python and the Holy Grail")
   (1979, "Monty Python's Life of Brian")
   (1982, "Monty Python Live at the Hollywood Bowl")
   (1983, "Monty Python's The Meaning of Life")

You've now created an SQLite database using the :mod:`!sqlite3` module,

> inserted data and ran several SQL queries against it.

Reviewer: Inserting data is technically part of running queries, so maybe you could say something like "...and used its functions and methods to perform some common database operations.".

Reviewer 2: Maybe, though perhaps that's a bit pedantic for a tutorial. Also, what's "its" here? It would be implied to be the database, but I assume you mean `sqlite3` and implicitly its classes?

Reviewer: Yes, I meant `sqlite3`.  My suggestion can probably be improved, but the idea was to focus on the fact that the reader should now be able to use the functions/methods provided by the module to interact with the DB and perform queries.

Reviewer 2: I see; in that case, you could say something like

```suggestion
inserted data and performed several common database operations on it.
```

though there would likely be value in greater concrete specificity, e.g.

```suggestion
inserted data and retrieved values from it in multiple ways.
```

and maybe "admiring" it a bit with a few further tweaks, e.g. "robust" database, etc.

To note, I've framed it in terms of what the reader has _done_, as opposed to what they may have _learned_ to be able to to do. With Diataxis, it is heavily stressed that you should not tell the reader what they've _learned_, as opposed to what they've _done_ (emphasis original):

> **There is no responsibility on the pupil to learn, understand or remember** - the learner’s only obligation in this contract is to do things as directed.

>  Sadly, however much you desire it, you will not be able to learn for your pupil. You cannot make them learn. All you can do is make it so they can learn.

> "*You have built a secure, three-layer hylomorphic stasis engine…*"
>
> Describe (and admire, in a mild way) what your learner has accomplished (note - not: “you have learned…”)

Author: I like your latter suggestion (which I have applied, for now), but I'm not totally satisfied with this whole conclusion. I'll revisit it before landing.

Reviewer 2: Yeah, I'm not either, but hopefully you'll have better ideas than I did, heh

Author: I updated the final query to show the highest scoring movie, which happens to be _"Monty Python and the Holy Grail"_. We _could_ use the word "grail" in the conclusion 😎...

Reviewer 2: Interesting, when "The Life of Brian" is widely considered to be their most critically acclaimed work...

.. _SQL injection attacks: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/SQL_injection
.. _cursors: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Cursor_(databases)
.. _flexible typing: https://www.sqlite.org/flextypegood.html
.. _transactions: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Database_transaction
.. _sqlite_master: https://www.sqlite.org/schematab.html

.. seealso::

>    * :ref:`sqlite3-howtos` for details how to handle specific tasks.

Reviewer: Do you think it would be helpful to list a few common/useful howtos under this?
We could also include the aforementioned ones about transactions and placeholders, so that users don't have to go back looking for them.

Reviewer 3: It never hurts to link to how-to guides (or indeed anything) from a tutorial.

Call :meth:`con.cursor() <Connection.cursor>` to create the :class:`Cursor`::

   cur = con.cursor()

Now that we've got a database connection and a cursor,
we can create a database table ``movie`` with columns for title,
release year, and review score.
For simplicity, we can just use column names in the table declaration --
thanks to the `flexible typing`_ feature of SQLite,
specifying the data types is optional.
Execute the ``CREATE TABLE`` statement
by calling :meth:`cur.execute(...) <Cursor.execute>`::

   cur.execute("CREATE TABLE movie(title, year, score)")

.. Ideally, we'd use sqlite_schema instead of sqlite_master below,
   but SQLite versions older than 3.33.0 do not recognise that variant.

We can verify that the new table has been created by querying
the ``sqlite_master`` table built-in to SQLite,
which should now contain an entry for the ``movie`` table definition
(see `The Schema Table`_ for details).
Execute that query by calling :meth:`cur.execute(...) <Cursor.execute>`,
assign the result to ``res``,
and call :meth:`res.fetchone() <Cursor.fetchone>` to fetch the resulting row::

   >>> res = cur.execute("SELECT name FROM sqlite_master")

>    >>> res.fetchone()

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
   >>> print(res.fetchone())
```

As discussed above, to be consistent with the other examples that include explicit `print()`s)

Author: See https://github.com/python/cpython/pull/95749#discussion_r948853274

Author: ```suggestion
   >>> res.fetchone() is None
   True
```

Reviewer 2: Keeping me on my toes again, I see? This is the other instance :)

Reviewer 2: I assume we want to apply the original change? Or how do we want to handle this?

Author: I think it is fine as it is. We're not `print`ing at every step either, so there is no such consistency to heed, IMO.

   ('movie',)

> The query shows that the table has been created,
> as it returns a :class:`tuple` containing the table's name.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
We can see that the table has been created,
as the query returns a :class:`tuple` containing the table's name.
```

Clarify grammatical ambiguity on what "it" is here (the table or the query)

If we query ``sqlite_master`` for a non-existent table ``spam``,
:meth:`!res.fetchone()` will return ``None``::

   >>> res = cur.execute("SELECT name FROM sqlite_master WHERE name='spam'")

>    >>> res.fetchone()
>    >>>

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
   >>> print(res.fetchone())
   None
```

Be more clear and explicit here about what is going on—I could see how a beginner might be confused by nothing being printed and just returning the prompt.

Reviewer: This feels a bit unnecessary and distracting, even if more explicit.  Someone learning `sqlite3` should already be somewhat familiar with how the interactive interpreter works.  Even if they don't understand that the method returns `None`  and the interactive interpreter ignores it, the point of the example is still clear: there are no results.

Reviewer 2: I could see the argument if it made the example much more verbose, but in this case its just adding a simple `print()` and replacing a prompt with the output `None`, so I don't really understand how being clearer and more explicit about the intent here is "distracting". In fact, I'd say I'm a fairly experienced Python user, and this behavior still confuses me (if momentarily) once and a while.

Using an explicit `print()` where printed output is required makes the intent and the result clearer and more unambiguous, per the Diataxis tutorial principle of [Ensure the user sees results immediately](https://diataxis.fr/tutorials/#ensure-the-user-sees-results-immediately):

> As far as possible, the effect of every action should be clear to them as soon as possible. The relation of cause and effect should be evident. Finally, each result should be something that the user can see as meaningful. **Every step the learner follows should produce a comprehensible result, however small.**

This also doesn't presume familiarity with the somewhat peculiar and not always expected behavior of `None` when implicitly versus explicitly printed, per [Make your tutorial repeatable](https://diataxis.fr/tutorials/#make-your-tutorial-repeatable):

> Unless you’re very lucky, the users of your tutorial will have different levels of skill and understanding.

Furthermore, an explicit `print()` works regardless of how the user is running their code (not just directly line by line at the interactive `python` interpreter prompt), in keeping with [Ensure that the tutorial works reliably](https://diataxis.fr/tutorials/#ensure-that-the-tutorial-works-reliably):

> The learner needs to see that when they follow your directions, they will attain the results you promise.
 
and [Make your tutorial repeatable](https://diataxis.fr/tutorials/#make-your-tutorial-repeatable):

> They might also be using different tools and operating systems and you can’t rely on them having the same resources or environment.

It is also consistent with all the other examples that produce output, save one (the other `cur.fetchone`, which would be good to also update).

Finally, the [Devguide explicitly proscribes using an empty prompt as the last line](https://devguide.python.org/documentation/markup/#showing-code-examples):

>After the last line of input or output presented, there should not be an “unused” primary prompt; this is an example of what *not* to do:
>
> ```pycon
> >>> 1 + 1
> 2
> >>>
> ```

Author: I'd use a simple test instead of a `print`:

```suggestion
   >>> res.fetchone() == None
   True
```

An `assert` would also do.

Reviewer 2: That also works...though it seems a little inconsistent with what the other instances do?

Also, of course:

```suggestion
   >>> res.fetchone() is None
   True
```

Author: Doh; I only put it there to see if you could spot the anti-pattern 😆

Reviewer 2: Keeping me on my toes :laughing:

to bind Python values to SQL statements,
to avoid `SQL injection attacks`_
(see :ref:`sqlite3-placeholders` for more details).

We can verify that the new rows were inserted
by executing a ``SELECT`` query,
this time iterating over the results of the query::

   >>> for row in cur.execute("SELECT year, title FROM movie ORDER BY year"):
   ...     print(row)
   (1971, "And Now for Something Completely Different")
   (1975, "Monty Python and the Holy Grail")
   (1979, "Monty Python's Life of Brian")
   (1982, "Monty Python Live at the Hollywood Bowl")
   (1983, "Monty Python's The Meaning of Life")

Each row is a two-item :class:`tuple` of ``(year, title)``,
matching the columns selected in the query.

Finally, verify that the database has been written to disk
by calling :meth:`con.close() <Connection.close>`
to close the existing connection, opening a new one,
creating a new cursor, then querying the database::

   >>> con.close()
   >>> new_con = sqlite3.connect("tutorial.db")
   >>> new_cur = new_con.cursor()
   >>> res = new_cur.execute("SELECT year, title FROM movie ORDER BY score DESC"):
   >>> title, year = res.fetchone()

>    >>> print(f'The highest scoring Monty Python movie is "{title}", released in {year}')

Reviewer: There might be one last nit before landing:
```suggestion
   >>> print(f'The highest scoring Monty Python movie is {title!r}, released in {year}')
```
On one hand, quoting directly is an antipattern that we shouldn't teach in a tutorial, and `!r` should be preferred.
On the other hand, there's a slight risk of confusion for readers that are not familiar with f-strings and `!r`.

Author: Yes, this is true. I do this all the time; thanks for catching.

To reduce the risk of confusion, we can simply link to the f-string docs.

Reviewer 2: Funny enough, I just caught myself doing that last night, even though I'm usually pretty good about that, heh

Author: > To reduce the risk of confusion, we can simply link to the f-string docs.

After thinking about this; I think we should deliberately not say anything at all about the f-string.

      PEP written by Marc-André Lemburg.

.. We use the following practises for SQL code:
   - UPPERCASE for keywords
   - snake_case for schema
   - single quotes for string literals
   - singular for table names
   - if needed, use double quotes for table and column names

.. _sqlite3-tutorial:

Tutorial
--------

> In this tutorial, you will create a database of Monty Python movies,
> using basic :mod:`!sqlite3` APIs.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In this tutorial, you will create a database of Monty Python movies
using basic :mod:`!sqlite3` functionality.
```

* "APIs" -> "functionality", as its more concrete, clear and not every beginner will necessarily be familiar with it
* Elide unnecessary comma

It assumes a fundamental understanding of database concepts,
including `cursors`_ and `transactions`_.

> First, you need to create a new database and open

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
First, we need to create a new database and open
```

Following @evildmp 's guidance

a database connection to allow :mod:`!sqlite3` to work with it.
Call :func:`sqlite3.connect` to to create a connection to
the database :file:`tutorial.db` in the current working directory,
implicitly creating it if it does not exist::

   import sqlite3
   con = sqlite3.connect("tutorial.db")

The returned :class:`Connection` object ``con``
represents the connection to the on-disk database.

In order to execute SQL statements and fetch results from SQL queries,

> you use a database cursor.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
you will need to use a database cursor.
```

Here, you are letting the user know what they _will need_ to do, not telling them what they must do right now (which is instead the purpose of the next sentence)

or, if you want to follow @evildmp 's guidelines (which I like),

```suggestion
we will need to use a database cursor.
```

Call :meth:`con.cursor() <Connection.cursor>` to create the :class:`Cursor`::

   cur = con.cursor()

> Now that you've got a database connection and a cursor,

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Now that we've got a database connection and a cursor,
```

> you can create a database table ``movie`` with columns for title,

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
we can create a database table ``movie`` with columns for title,
```

release year, and review score.

> For simplicity, just use column names in the table declaration --

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
For simplicity, we can just use column names in the table declaration --
```

thanks to the `flexible typing`_ feature of SQLite,
specifying the data types is optional.
Execute the ``CREATE TABLE`` statement
by calling :meth:`con.execute(...) <Cursor.execute>`::

   cur.execute("CREATE TABLE movie(title, year, score)")

.. Ideally, we'd use sqlite_schema instead of sqlite_master below,
   but SQLite versions older than 3.33.0 do not recognise that variant.

> You can verify that the new table has been created by querying

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
We can verify that the new table has been created by querying
```

the ``sqlite_master`` table built-in to SQLite,
which should contain an entry for the ``movie`` table definition.
Execute that query by calling :meth:`cur.execute(...) <Cursor.execute>`,

> assigning the result to ``res``,
> and call :meth:`res.fetchone() <Cursor.fetchone>` to fetch the resulting row::

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
assign the result to ``res``,
and call :meth:`res.fetchone() <Cursor.fetchone>` to fetch the resulting row::
```

Tense agreement (probably my mistake)

   >>> res = cur.execute("SELECT name FROM sqlite_master")
   >>> res.fetchone()
   ('movie',)

As expected, the query shows the table has been created,

> as it returns a :class:`tuple`: containing the name of the table.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
as it returns a :class:`tuple`: containing the table's name.
```

Reduce impact of repetition

As an exercise, try querying ``sqlite_master``
for a non-existent table ``abc``::

   >>> res = cur.execute("SELECT name FROM sqlite_master WHERE name='abc'")
   >>> res.fetchone()
   >>>

> As expected, the query returns an empty result.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Indeed, the query returns an empty result.
```

Avoid double use of "as expected" and avoid putting additional expectations on readers

> Now, you'll add two rows of data supplied as SQL literals

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Now, add two rows of data supplied as SQL literals
```

Again, as before

by executing an ``INSERT`` statement,
once again by calling :meth:`cur.execute(...) <Cursor.execute>`::

   cur.execute("""
       INSERT INTO movie VALUES
           ('Monty Python and the Holy Grail', 1975, 8.2),
           ('And Now for Something Completely Different', 1971, 7.5)
   """)

The ``INSERT`` statement implicitly opens a transaction,
which needs to be committed before changes are saved in the database
(see :ref:`sqlite3-controlling-transactions` for details).
Call :meth:`con.commit() <Connection.commit>` on the connection object
to commit the transaction::

   con.commit()

> You can verify that the data was inserted correctly

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
We can verify that the data was inserted correctly
```

by executing a ``SELECT`` query.
Use the now-familiar :meth:`con.execute(...) <Cursor.execute>` to
assign the result to ``res``,

> and call :meth:`res.fetchall() <Cursor.fetchall>` to all resulting rows::

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
and call :meth:`res.fetchall() <Cursor.fetchall>` to return all resulting rows::
```

Missing word here

   >>> res = cur.execute("SELECT score FROM movie")
   >>> res.fetchall()
   [(8.2,), (7.5,)]

The result is a :class:`list` of two :class:`!tuple`\s, one per row,
each containing that row's ``score`` value.

> Now, you'll insert three more rows by calling

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Now, insert three more rows by calling
```

Again, here's we're telling the reader what _to_ to, rather than what we're _going_ to do

Author: +1 
FWIW, this is the form I initially used for this PR, up to some revisions ago.

   data = [
       ("Monty Python Live at the Hollywood Bowl", 1982, 7.9),
       ("Monty Python's The Meaning of Life", 1983, 7.5),
       ("Monty Python's Life of Brian", 1979, 8.0),
   ]
   cur.executemany("INSERT INTO movie VALUES(?, ?, ?)", data)
   con.commit()  # Remember to commit the transaction after executing INSERT.

Notice that ``?`` placeholders are used to bind ``data`` to the query.
Always use placeholders instead of :ref:`string formatting <tut-formatting>`
to bind Python values to SQL statements,
to avoid `SQL injection attacks`_
(see :ref:`sqlite3-placeholders` for more details).

You can verify that the new rows were inserted
by executing a ``SELECT`` query,
this time iterating over the results of the query::

   >>> for row in cur.execute("SELECT year, title FROM movie ORDER BY year"):
   ...     print(row)
   (1971, "And Now for Something Completely Different")
   (1975, "Monty Python and the Holy Grail")
   (1979, "Monty Python's Life of Brian")
   (1982, "Monty Python Live at the Hollywood Bowl")
   (1983, "Monty Python's The Meaning of Life")

Each row is a two-item :class:`tuple` of ``(year, title)``,
matching the columns selected in the query.

> Finally, you'll verify that the database has been written to disk by

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Finally, verify that the database has been written to disk by
```

We're actually telling the reader to do this with this sentance, not just letting them know what we're _going_ to do, so use appropriate verbage

   - single quotes for string literals
   - singular for table names
   - if needed, use double quotes for table and column names

.. _sqlite3-tutorial:

Tutorial
--------

In this tutorial, you will create a database of Monty Python movies
using basic :mod:`!sqlite3` functionality.
It assumes a fundamental understanding of database concepts,
including `cursors`_ and `transactions`_.

First, we need to create a new database and open
a database connection to allow :mod:`!sqlite3` to work with it.
Call :func:`sqlite3.connect` to to create a connection to
the database :file:`tutorial.db` in the current working directory,
implicitly creating it if it does not exist::

   import sqlite3
   con = sqlite3.connect("tutorial.db")

The returned :class:`Connection` object ``con``
represents the connection to the on-disk database.

In order to execute SQL statements and fetch results from SQL queries,
we will need to use a database cursor.
Call :meth:`con.cursor() <Connection.cursor>` to create the :class:`Cursor`::

   cur = con.cursor()

Now that we've got a database connection and a cursor,
we can create a database table ``movie`` with columns for title,
release year, and review score.

> For simplicity, we can just use column names in the table declaration --

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For simplicity, we can just use column names in the table declaration ---
```
As mentioned in one of the comments, `--` creates an en dash, whereas `---` creates an em dash.

thanks to the `flexible typing`_ feature of SQLite,
specifying the data types is optional.
Execute the ``CREATE TABLE`` statement
by calling :meth:`cur.execute(...) <Cursor.execute>`::

   cur.execute("CREATE TABLE movie(title, year, score)")

.. Ideally, we'd use sqlite_schema instead of sqlite_master below,
   but SQLite versions older than 3.33.0 do not recognise that variant.

> We can verify that the new table has been created by querying
> the ``sqlite_master`` table built-in to SQLite,
> which should now contain an entry for the ``movie`` table definition
> (see `The Schema Table`_ for details).
> Execute that query by calling :meth:`cur.execute(...) <Cursor.execute>`,
> assign the result to ``res``,
> and call :meth:`res.fetchone() <Cursor.fetchone>` to fetch the resulting row::

Reviewer: I noticed that the lines are a bit inconsistent -- some are long, some are short.  Is this intentional or are you planning to reformat them to something like this before merging the PR?
```suggestion
We can verify that the new table has been created by querying the
``sqlite_master`` table built-in to SQLite, which should now contain
an entry for the ``movie`` table definition (see `The Schema Table`_
for details).  Execute that query by calling :meth:`cur.execute(...)
<Cursor.execute>`, assign the result to ``res``, and call
:meth:`res.fetchone() <Cursor.fetchone>` to fetch the resulting row::
```

Author: It is intentional. I try to use semantic line breaks wherever possible (unless I end up with very short lines). Especially starting each sentence on a new line can help reduce future diffs.

Reviewer 2: Indeed, this is something I practice and encourage as well—ensuring the physical structure of the source text corresponds to its logical structure rather than being essentially arbitrary has major benefits not only for diffs/merges, but also is very beneficial when writing, editing and reviewing—its easier to spot sentences and clauses that are too long or too short and quickly grasp the structure of the text, there's a lot more flexibility to atomically modify one clause without re-wrapping everything (especially useful in review comments), and it allows easily adding, removing and re-ordering clauses using standard editor functionality. Of course, a set column width is usually somewhat better for lengthy _reading_ sessions, but so are countless other things in the rendered output, which exists for that purpose. See the [SemBr](https://sembr.org/) spec for more.

Reviewer: This is what I usually do:
* I don't go on a newline unless the rendered output also has to go (one reason is that by reading the source it might look like a new paragraph, but in the rendered output it isn't).
* Even if I have an 80-char per line limit, I tend to leave some extra margin and stay under 70, both to make it easier to read and to give some room to refactor without having to reflow the whole paragraph.  This is also recommended here:  https://peps.python.org/pep-0008/#maximum-line-length
* I try to break lines in a way that improves readability.  For example, if I can only fit the first couple of words of a new sentence at the end of the previous one, I might just go on a newline, but if I can fit several I don't.
* I don't worry too much about having neat diffs -- if the changes I made don't fit in the extra margin mentioned above I just reflow lines as needed.  If the paragraphs are shorts (and they generally should), you won't usually need to reflow more than a few lines anyway.
* I use a double space after full stops to separate sentences in a paragraph.

The suggestion above is compatible with these guidelines, however if you prefer this style and use it consistently in the sqlite3 docs, I'm fine with it.

Reviewer 2: I'm struggling to see what advantage that approach has over SemBr, other than simple familiarity and marginally better UX when reading a lot of text in source form (which is far from ideal regardless), which is still also fully compatible with the guidelines in PEP 8 (and for PEPs, in PEP 12). When I was first introduced to the idea, I was rather skeptical, and particularly concerned about the potential for extra cognitive load when writing them, but using them in them in practice they've ended up feeling very natural after a short amount of time and only require a small amount of additional effort, while bringing significant benefits as a writer and particularly as an editor, wrangler and reviewer.

> I don't go on a newline unless the rendered output also has to go 

Huh? I'm not sure what you mean to say here.

> I don't worry too much about having neat diffs -- if the changes I made don't fit in the extra margin mentioned above I just reflow lines as needed. If the paragraphs are shorts (and they generally should), you won't usually need to reflow more than a few lines anyway.

Well, its not just about `git diff` output being more useful—it benefits anyone who is looking at GitHub or CLI diff, blame, commit/show, PR, etc output by showing only the actual meaningful changes without any distracting reflowing noise. 

Further, it is particularly beneficial for PR reviewers, one of the areas (especially on `cpython`) that is most critically limited for committer bandwidth. It makes it easier to see exactly what significant changes a PR made (especially since reflows break GitHub's otherwise very-useful rich diffs), and makes GH suggestions much more useful, as they can be made just on the logical units affected (typically a single physical line, rather than having to select multiple) with greatly decreased need to worry about reflows, and suggestions on adjacent logical units do not conflict, and can instead be cleanly separated.

Not to mention, it makes it much faster for me to scan the syntactic and semantic structure of the text and consider it in logical units, and avoid missing things when I'm reviewing the source syntax (and I of course read the final rendered result, as the reader would, when reading for overall content). As someone who spends a large amount of my volunteer time reviewing docs and similar content and makes heavy use of suggestions as a critical tool for doing so, this has made a particularly significant improvement to my overall reviewer productivity and efficiency and made reviewing less of a chore.

Reviewer: >>  I don't go on a newline unless the rendered output also has to go
>
> Huh? I'm not sure what you mean to say here.

I like the source to visually match the output whenever possible (WYSIWYG). For example, if in the source I write:
```rst
First line.
Second line.
Third line.
```
It will be rendered as:
> First line. Second line. Third line.

This is potentially misleading, so I try to avoid adding extra newlines in the source that are not reflected in the rendered output.

If I see something like this in the source I will wonder if the author meant to have two separate paragraphs but forgot the additional newline between the two or not:
```rst
This is a very long sentence that barely fits on a single
line.
This is another sentence that in the source looks like a
separate paragraph, but  in the output is not.
```

> See the [SemBr](https://sembr.org/) spec for more.

The link doesn't appear to work for me (both now and when you posted it).

Author: > This is potentially misleading, so I try to avoid adding extra newlines in the source that are not reflected in the rendered output.

Most markup languages work that way. HTML, Markdown, reST, etc. I'd assume that kind of knowledge from folks who work on the docs. Maybe I should not assume that.

> I use a double space after full stops to separate sentences in a paragraph.

Recently (the last year or so) I've seen core devs arguing to stop using that practise; I'll see if I can dig up a link to the discussion. Anyway, using semantic breaks makes that point moot :)

Reviewer 2: > I like the source to visually match the output whenever possible (WYSIWYG).

Yes, but reST (and Markdown, etc) is of course _not_ a WYSIWYG language, and single line breaks in the source are completely ignored in and will almost never match the rendered output anyway in the real world (not to mention all the other processing that reST does that may cause rendered line length to vary). Your much more realistic example above

```rst
We can verify that the new table has been created by querying the
``sqlite_master`` table built-in to SQLite, which should now contain
an entry for the ``movie`` table definition (see `The Schema Table`_
for details).  Execute that query by calling :meth:`cur.execute(...)
<Cursor.execute>`, assign the result to ``res``, and call
:meth:`res.fetchone() <Cursor.fetchone>` to fetch the resulting row::
```

is rendered as (at full width on desktop with our current theme, which may of course change substantially at different widths/devices, switching themes, changing font scaling, etc):

![image](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/17051931/184864753-8d2fba74-7365-44e9-b990-0a4116870e94.png)

What's more, this is not a bug but a _feature_ :wink: , as it gives the raw source the flexibility to follow a more logical line break convention better suited to editing, reviewing, suggesting and use with source control (the primary purpose of such), while automatically reflowing the rendered output for an optimum experience for readers. Arbitrary fixed hard wrapping gives up most of those benefits, without much of a clear gain that I can see.

> For example, if in the source I write:
> 
> ```
> First line.
> Second line.
> Third line.
> ```

Those are some uncomfortably short consecutive lines for real-world text, which SemBr merely draws attention to. A more realistic example, like that above, will not generally have the psuedo-"WYSIWYG" property illustrated here.

> This is potentially misleading, so I try to avoid adding extra newlines in the source that are not reflected in the rendered output.

I'm not sure I see a categorical distinction in this respect between newlines inserted for hard breaks and those for semantic breaks, as neither are reflected in the output, except that the latter are motivated by the logical content of the text while the former is by arbitrary convention. If readers aren't familiar with such a basic property of most markup languages, there is likely a whole lot else more important they aren't familiar with either.

In fact, maybe its just me, but the fact that SemBr source doesn't (falsely) pretend to look exactly like rendered output actually helps _avoid_ confusion over these breaks being significant, and avoid my typographer's eye naturally picking up on and wanting to fix problems like hanging chads and awkward splices that of course have no relationship to the actual rendered text (to note, professional designers will often actually do their best to massage text to be closer to semantic breaks if practical within the bounds of their target column width, as it reads better).

> If I see something like this in the source I will wonder if the author meant to have two separate paragraphs but forgot the additional newline between the two or not:
> 
> ```
> This is a very long sentence that barely fits on a single
> line.
> This is another sentence that in the source looks like a
> separate paragraph, but  in the output is not.
> ```

But this isn't at all SemBr; in general you'd rarely if ever have a SemBr physical line anywhere near that short, because in general a logical line shouldn't usually be that short, at least with any regularity, or it likely just points to an underlying issue with the structure of the writing itself. Furthermore, given SemBr breaks at logic units, over a passage of non-trivial length the true motivation for the breaks quickly becomes clear, just like for hard breaks. Here's how that would look in actual SemBr (with the standard 79 character max width):

```text
This is a very long sentence that barely fits on a single line.
This is another sentence that in the source looks like a separate paragraph,
but in the output is not.
```

> The link doesn't appear to work for me (both now and when you posted it).

I confirmed it worked when I posted it, but it seems the server is suddenly down now. [Here's the Wayback Machine version](https://web.archive.org/web/20220809231647/https://sembr.org/).

Author: I'll mark this as resolved. If needed, we can continue the discussion regarding semantic breaks on Discourse :)

   >>> res = cur.execute("SELECT name FROM sqlite_master")
   >>> res.fetchone()
   ('movie',)

As expected, the query shows the table has been created,
as it returns a :class:`tuple` containing the table's name.

> As an exercise, try querying ``sqlite_master``
> for a non-existent table ``abc``::
> 
>    >>> res = cur.execute("SELECT name FROM sqlite_master WHERE name='abc'")
>    >>> res.fetchone()
>    >>>
> 
> Indeed, the query returns an empty result.

Reviewer: Usually exercises are left to the reader, but here we are immediately showing what happens like we did throughout the rest of the tutorial, so I'm not sure why it's called "exercise".  I would remove that and simplify a bit.
In addition, I changed the name of the non-existing table to a more fitting `spam`.
```suggestion
If we try querying ``sqlite_master`` for a non-existent table ``'spam'``,
:meth:`!res.fetchone()` will return ``None``::

   >>> res = cur.execute("SELECT name FROM sqlite_master WHERE name='spam'")
   >>> res.fetchone()
   >>>
```

Author: Thanks, `spam` is a lot better :)

I also agree regarding calling this an exercise. I'll apply a variant of this suggestion.

Reviewer 2: I take it you haven't actually pushed the changes yet?

Reviewer: Actually I meant to remove the "Indeed, the query returns an empty result." after the example, since it's now mentioned before it.  I now updated the suggestion above.

Author: > I take it you haven't actually pushed the changes yet?

I pushed them, but this change was never applied :)

each containing that row's ``score`` value.

Now, insert three more rows by calling
:meth:`cur.executemany(...) <Cursor.executemany>`::

   data = [
       ("Monty Python Live at the Hollywood Bowl", 1982, 7.9),
       ("Monty Python's The Meaning of Life", 1983, 7.5),
       ("Monty Python's Life of Brian", 1979, 8.0),
   ]
   cur.executemany("INSERT INTO movie VALUES(?, ?, ?)", data)
   con.commit()  # Remember to commit the transaction after executing INSERT.

Notice that ``?`` placeholders are used to bind ``data`` to the query.
Always use placeholders instead of :ref:`string formatting <tut-formatting>`
to bind Python values to SQL statements,
to avoid `SQL injection attacks`_
(see :ref:`sqlite3-placeholders` for more details).

We can verify that the new rows were inserted
by executing a ``SELECT`` query,
this time iterating over the results of the query::

   >>> for row in cur.execute("SELECT year, title FROM movie ORDER BY year"):
   ...     print(row)
   (1971, "And Now for Something Completely Different")
   (1975, "Monty Python and the Holy Grail")
   (1979, "Monty Python's Life of Brian")
   (1982, "Monty Python Live at the Hollywood Bowl")

>    (1983, "Monty Python's The Meaning of Life")

Reviewer: Instead of repeating the same query below and duplicating the (longish) output, do you think it would be enough to do a `SELECT count` and show that there are now 5 movies?  This will make the tutorial shorter, introduce and teach a different query (the `count`), and in the final example you can show the full result.

Author: That is a good idea, but the point of this query is to introduce the cursor iterator. That would be moot if we change the query to return just one row. Perhaps we could alter the last example to use a more fancy output? Something like:

```python3
for row in cur.execute("SELECT title, year FROM movie ORDER BY year"):
    print(f'- "{title}" was released in {year}')
```

or:

```python3
releases = [r[0] for r in cur.execute("SELECT year FROM movie ORDER BY year")]
print(f"Monty Python released {len(releases)} movies between {releases[0]} and {releases[-1]}")
```

Author: I'm going to apply a variant of this:

```python3
res = cur.execute("SELECT title, year FROM movie ORDER BY score DESC")
title, year = res.fetchone()
print(f"The highest scoring Monty Python movie is {title}, released in {year}")
```

<details>
<summary>Non-scientific research: trying the tutorial out in real life</summary>

I tested this tutorial out on some folks I know; a scientist in hydrodynamics, and an electrical engineer. Both only know a bare minimum of Python (they know how to write short and simple scripts; most of their "programming" is modifying other people's scripts); they both have only a vague understanding of what a database is. Results:

- the scientist had no comments other than "this is a very good tutorial"
- the engineer commented that the `score` field was not used too much in the examples; other than that, it was remarked that this is a great improvement compared to the old tutorial

</details>

Reviewer 2: A scientist, an engineer and a programmer walk into a bar...

> I'm going to apply a variant of this:

Only issue is this doesn't directly show the iterator behavior, no?

> I tested this tutorial out on some folks I know; a scientist in hydrodynamics, and an electrical engineer. 

Seems pretty "scientific" to me :laughing:

Author: > Only issue is this doesn't directly show the iterator behavior, no?

I'm talking about the very last example (verifying that the database was written to disk), not the iterator-example :)

Tutorial
--------

In this tutorial, you will learn the basics of the :mod:`!sqlite3` API
by creating an on-disk database :file:`python.db`
for managing Python release metadata.
A fundamental understanding of database concepts,
like `transactions`_ and `cursors`_, is assumed.

To start working with an SQLite database,
you must first open a connection to it.
Call the :func:`sqlite3.connect` function
to create a :class:`Connection` to the database :file:`python.db`::

   import sqlite3
   con = sqlite3.connect("python.db")

SQLite will implicitly create the database file :file:`python.db`
in the current working directory if it does not exist.
The returned :class:`Connection` object ``con``
represents our connection to the on-disk database.

In order to execute SQL statements and fetch results from SQL queries,
we need to use a database cursor.
Call the :meth:`~Connection.cursor` method of ``con`` to create
:class:`Cursor` ``cur``::

   cur = con.cursor()

Now, let us create a database table ``release`` with columns for version
number and release date, and inserting the release data for Python 1.0.
Execute the SQL statements
by calling the :meth:`~Cursor.execute` method of ``cur``::

>    cur.execute("""CREATE TABLE release(version, releasedate)""")

Author: SQLite lets us create columns without data types; I deliberately exploit that feature to make the SQL compact. I'm not sure it makes sense to mention it in the actual docs, though.

Reviewer 2: We definitely don't want to go into any real detail and its best to simplify it as much as practical; on the other hand, I wouldn't want it to be _too_ magical and bite users later, if there isn't at least some link/reference to what's really going on. But I'm not the SQL expert to judge this this; I've probably learned as much about it from reviewing your PRs as anywhere else :laughing:

Author: I've mentioned this feature; PTAL

Tutorial
--------

> In this tutorial you will learn the basics of the :mod:`!sqlite3` API

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In this tutorial, you will learn the basics of the :mod:`!sqlite3` API
```

Add missing comma

> by creating an on-disk database :file:`example.db`,

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
by creating an on-disk database :file:`example.db`
```

Unnecessary comma

and executing SQL queries against it.
A fundamental understanding of database concepts,

> like transactions and cursors, is assumed.

Reviewer 2: Not essential, but linking to another tutorial or resource here would be helpful. Alternatively, you could at least, e.g., link to the relevant Wikipedia articles

```suggestion
A fundamental understanding of database concepts,
like `transactions <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Database_transaction>`__
and `cursors <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Cursor_(databases)>`__,
is assumed.
```

Author: +1

Start by using the :func:`sqlite3.connect` function to
open a database :class:`Connection` to :file:`example.db`;
SQLite will implicitly create the database file :file:`example`
in the current working directory, if it does not exist.
The returned :class:`!Connection` object represents our
connection to the on-disk SQLite database::

   import sqlite3
   con = sqlite3.connect('example.db')

> 

Reviewer 2: Considering this is a tutorial (whose purpose is learning) rather than a how-to (who's purpose is accomplishing a task), I'd suggest rewriting this somewhat. Also, ensure the colon-ed statement actually describes what the next code block is doing, instead of separating the (non-standalone) instruction leading to it from the code block by several sentences.

Additionally, fix a number of other things along the way:

```suggestion
To start working with an SQLite database,
you must first open a connection to it.
Use the :func:`sqlite3.connect` function
to create a :class:`Connection` to the database :file:`example.db`::

   import sqlite3
   con = sqlite3.connect('example.db')

SQLite will implicitly create the database file :file:`example.db`
in the current working directory if it does not exist.
The returned :class:`Connection` object ``con``
represents our connection to the on-disk database.

```

Author: This resembles my initial draft of this section, however I rewrote it based on feedback from the first review. I do prefer this to how it is currently, though. Thanks!

Now, create a :class:`Cursor` object using :meth:`~Connection.cursor`.

> Call its :meth:`~Cursor.execute` method to perform SQL queries::

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Now, create a :class:`Cursor` object using
the :meth:`~Connection.cursor` method of ``con``
and call its :meth:`~Cursor.execute` method to perform SQL queries::
```

Combine these sentences, as they both are jointly describing what happens in the next, so they should be combined. Also, the previous writing makes it sound like `cursor` is a module-level function; therefore, this clarifies that.

But, see above for broader changes.

Reviewer 2: Alternatively, this could be split into two different code blocks, with corresponding descriptions, especially if more of an intro is added there.

Author: > Alternatively, this could be split into two different code blocks, with corresponding descriptions, especially if more of an intro is added there.

That may be needed; for now, I think it is good as it is.

   cur = con.cursor()

>    # Create table, then insert a row of data.

Reviewer 2: Instead of putting this explanation as single code comment, especially if you split the code blocks, you could move it to the prose instead

Author: +1

Reviewer: Having comments is good both as a quick summary of what we are doing for people who just read the prose, and also for people who didn't read it and are just skimming through.  In this case it's probably fine to skip it though.

   cur.execute('''CREATE TABLE stocks
                  (date text, trans text, symbol text, qty real, price real)''')
   cur.execute("INSERT INTO stocks VALUES ('2006-01-05','BUY','RHAT',100,35.14)")

The ``INSERT`` statement implicitly opens a transaction
that needs to be committed before changes are saved in the database.

> For more details, see the :ref:`sqlite3-controlling-transactions` how-to.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
that needs to be committed before changes are saved in the database
(see :ref:`sqlite3-controlling-transactions` for details).
```

Make this a parenthetical, as it belongs, rather than breaking up the flow of the paragraph with an aside. Also, simplify it a bit.

> Use the connection object to :meth:`~Connection.commit` the transaction::

Reviewer 2: I'm not sure about this, it might be okay, but my personal preference would be to be more explicit here

```suggestion
Call the :meth:`~Connection.commit` method on the connection object
to commit the transaction::
```

>    con.commit()  # Save the changes.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
   con.commit()
```

If this is one line of code and the comment just describes its general function, it should be stated in the prose instead, or elided, rather than duplicated here as a code comment.

Verify that data has been committed and written to disk:
close the connection, open a new connection,
create a new cursor,

> then use a ``SELECT`` query to read from the database::

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Verify that data has been committed and written to disk by
closing the connection and opening a new one,
creating a new cursor,
and then using a ``SELECT`` query to read from the database::
```

Improve flow and avoid repetition

   >>> con.close()
   >>> con = sqlite3.connect('example.db')

>    >>> cur = con.cursor()

Reviewer 2: Maybe a bit clearer to be a little more explicit that the old connection is not getting re-used?

```suggestion
   >>> con2 = sqlite3.connect('example.db')
   >>> cur = con2.cursor()
```

Author: Definitely

   >>> res = cur.execute('SELECT count(rowid) FROM stocks')
   >>> print(res.fetchone())
   (1,)

The result is a one-item :class:`tuple`:
one row, with one column.

> Now, insert three more rows of data,

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Now, insert three more rows of data
```

Unneeded comma

> using :meth:`~Cursor.executemany`::

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
using the :meth:`~Cursor.executemany` method::
```

A bit more explicit

>    >>> data = [

Reviewer 2: This doesn't need to be in `pycon` format, since no output is shown

Reviewer 2: Also, per our revised guidance, *data* should be ``data``.

and call :meth:`res.fetchone() <Cursor.fetchone>` to fetch the resulting row::

   >>> res = cur.execute("SELECT name FROM sqlite_master")
   >>> res.fetchone() is None
   True

>    ('movie',)

Reviewer 2: :thinking:

Reviewer 2: Keeping me on my toes again I see?

   ('2006-04-06', 'SELL', 'IBM', 500, 53.0)
   ('2006-04-05', 'BUY', 'MSFT', 1000, 72.0)

Each row is a five-item :class:`!tuple`.

> You've now created an SQLite database using the :mod:`!sqlite3` module.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion

You've now created an SQLite database using the :mod:`!sqlite3` module,
inserted values and ran several queries against it.
```

Describe what we've done in a little bit more detail.
Also, this is the closing line on a different subject from the previous, so it should be set off in its own paragraph.
